Defining the transcriptome and proteome in three functionally different human cell lines http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21179022
December 2010
Overview
Differential expression of mRNA and proteins is responsible for the development of specialized tissues and organs. The objective of this study was to analyze protein-coding genes according to cell specificity and their expression, both as transcripts and expressed proteins. They presented a quantitative analysis of three human cell lines of differing origins using three major approaches. RNA seq was used for transcriptome analysis, triple Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) Mass Spectrometry (MS) for proteomic analysis, and antibody-based immunofluorescence confocal microscopy (IF) for an additional proteomic analysis. This analysis was accompanied by a comparison of mRNA and protein levels between cell lines.
Using these three approaches, they demonstrated all cell lines expressed most of the genes analyzed. All of IF, RNA-seq, and SILAC MS found most of detected proteins and transcripts were shared across all three cell lines. Gene ontological (GO) analysis of detected proteins and transcripts found shared genes dealt with intracellular maintenance functions, while those that differed in expression between cell lines related to cell surface functions. Transcript abundance indicated genes expressed across all cell lines had higher mRNA abundance and genes with differential expression had lower abundance. This was also reflected in protein levels. 
Interestingly, only one third of proteins were detected by all methods. It was concluded MS analysis was limited in its detection threshold. However, with MS having almost no false positives and IF having many exclusively detected proteins not validated by western blot, the authors suggested that RNA-seq and MS become a gold standard to validate antibody based protein detection.
Methods and Data Analysis
IF Microscopy- Authors selected 3877 proteins for analysis using the antibodies of the Human Protein Atlas project (http://www.proteinatlas.org).
Triple SILAC LC-MS/MS- MaxQuant software (version 1.0.14.3) was used to process MS data. The MASCOT search engine was used for MS/MS spectra scanning. 
RNA-seq- Alignment was performed using BWA where only unique matches proceeded to quantification. The authors normalized RNA levels across genes by calculating RPKM values. As a filter, a threshold value of 0.1 for RPKM was chosen to detect transcripts of a gene to give a false positive rate (FDR) of 0.1% and false negative rate (FNR) of 5%. They mapped reads to a part of the RPS19 gene on chromosome 19 to demonstrate reads predominately localizing to exons and not non-coding regions. They also demonstrated their RPKM threshold value’s usefulness in detecting present gene transcripts by comparing protein coding genes obtained from Ensembl to a set of intergenic regions at least 1kb away from a known gene. The authors demonstrate a normal distribution of all detected transcripts in their cell lines by transforming their data to log2 RPKM (Fig. 2C). For differential expression analysis (DEA) between cell lines, the authors described scatter plotting log2 RPKM values of cell lines against each other and performing a z-test for fractions for each gene to compare read count proportions. A gene was counted as significantly different if its p value<0.01 after using FDR for multiple testing correction. A fold change of at least two between two cell lines categorized ‘slightly changed’ genes, at least four categorized ‘substantially changed,’ and at most two levels described ‘similar level’ expression.
mRNA and protein level comparison- Differences of transcript and protein expression between cell lines were analyzed by plotting transcript expression changes as log2 RPKM ratios and protein levels as log2 SILAC ratios. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients for compared cell lines described correlation.
Discussion and Comments
This paper presented an early global comparison of the human transcriptome and proteome. While limited in biological relevance using in vitro cell lines, it demonstrated similar findings to that seen in human tissues. It also demonstrated while protein levels and mRNA transcription are positively correlated by Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients, protein levels have a larger dynamic range possibly due to differences in translation rates and protein degradation. For its time, the analysis was straight forward. Log2 transformations made RPKM values a normal distribution and z-tests for DEA was effective. One change could use a more common alignment strategy like TopHat to account for spliced reads. BWA seems out of place in RNA-seq.
